[[!meta title="Reporting an error"]]

Reporting errors is a great way of helping us improve Tails.

Remember that **the more effectively you report an error**, the more likely we are
to fix it.

[[!toc levels=2]]

<h1 id="known">Check if the error is already known</h1>

Have a look at:

- The [[list of known issues|support/known_issues]]

- The
  [[!tails_gitlab groups/tails/-/milestones
  desc="list of things that will be fixed or improved in the next release"]]

<h1 id="useful">How to write a useful error report</h1>

- The first aim of a error report is to **tell the developers exactly
  how to reproduce the failure**, so try to reproduce the issue
  yourself and describe how you did that.

- If that is not possible, try to **describe what went wrong in
  detail**.  Write down the error messages, especially if they have
  numbers.

- Write **clearly and be precise**. Say what you mean, and make sure
  it cannot be misinterpreted.

- Be ready to provide extra information if the developers need it. If
  they did not need it, they would not be asking for it.

You can also refer to the great [How to Report Bugs
Effectively](http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/bugs.html), by
Simon Tatham.

<h1 id="whisperback">Use <i>WhisperBack</i></h1>

***WhisperBack* is an application written specifically to report errors anonymously
from inside Tails. If you are not able to use *WhisperBack*, see the [[special
cases|bug_reporting#special]].**

*WhisperBack* will help you fill-up an error report, including relevant technical
details and send it to us encrypted and through Tor.

Start *WhisperBack*
-------------------

To start *WhisperBack*, **Applications**&nbsp;▸ **System Tools**&nbsp;▸
**WhisperBack Error Reporting**.

Write the report
----------------

*WhisperBack* lets you give plenty of useful information about your error:

- **Summary** a summary of the error, try to be short, clear and informative

- **Name of the affected software**

- **Exact steps to reproduce the error**

- **Actual result and description of the error**

- **Desired result**

You can also have a look at the **technical details
to include** in your error report. It will give us information about
your hardware, your version of Tails and the startup process.

<div class="note">

<p>We are not able to answer every error report, so you might not receive a
reply from us.</p>

</div>

<h2 id="screenshot">Take a screenshot</h2>

It might be helpful to include a screenshot with your error report.

- To take a screenshot of the entire desktop, press
  **Print Screen**.

- To take a screenshot of a single window, press
  **Alt + Print Screen**.

- To take a screenshot of an area you select,
  press **Shift + Print Screen**.

The screenshot will automatically be saved in the
*Pictures* folder located in your
*Home* folder. The file name will begin with the
word *Screenshot*.

You can also take a screenshot using
*GNOME Screenshot*.

To start *GNOME Screenshot*, choose **Applications**&nbsp;▸
**Utilities**&nbsp;▸ **Screenshot**.

You can upload the screenshot to an
[encrypted Up1 host](https://github.com/Upload/Up1) such as the one
available at:

<https://share.riseup.net/>

Make sure to include in your error report a link to the screenshot.

Optional email address
----------------------

Giving us an email address allows us to contact you to clarify the problem. This
is needed for the vast majority of the reports we receive as most reports
without any contact information are useless. But note that it also provides
an opportunity for eavesdroppers, like your email or Internet provider, to
confirm that you are using Tails.

Optional OpenPGP key
--------------------

You can also indicate an OpenPGP key corresponding to this email address. You
can either give:

- A **key ID**, if the key is available on public key servers

- A **link to the key**, if the key is available on the web

- A **public key block**, if the key is not publicly available

Send your report
----------------

Once you are done writing your report, send it by clicking the *Send* button.

Once your email has been sent correctly you will get the following
notification: **Your message has been sent**.

<h1 id="special">If you cannot use <i>WhisperBack</i></h1>

You might not always be able to use *WhisperBack*. In those cases, you can also
send your error report by [[email|support/talk]] directly.

Note that if you send the report yourself, it might not be anonymous unless you
take special care (for example, using Tor with a throw-away email account).

<h2 id="offline">No Internet access</h2>

If you are not able to connect to the Internet from Tails, you can try
following our
[[instructions on troubleshooting Wi-Fi|doc/anonymous_internet/no-wifi]]
to fix your Internet connection.

*WhisperBack* won't be able to send your error report if you are not connected to
the Internet.

The following steps can be used as an alternative method to send your error
report:

1. In Tails, start *WhisperBack*.

2. In the error report window, expand "technical details to include".

3. Copy everything in the "debugging info" box.

4. Paste it to another document (using the *Text Editor* for instance).

5. Save the document on a USB stick.

6. Boot into a system with Internet connection and send your report.

<h2 id="not_start">Tails does not start</h2>

For troubleshooting instructions in case Tails fails to start, refer to
our installation instructions on:

- [[Starting a PC on a USB stick|doc/first_steps/start/pc]]

- [[Starting a Mac on a USB stick|doc/first_steps/start/mac]]

<h1 id="debian">Reproducing the error in Debian (for advanced users)</h1>

It is very useful for us to know if your error only affects Tails or also
affects Debian, on which Tails is based.

Doing so takes much more time so, in doubt, report your error as instructed
earlier and wait for guidance from our help desk.

- If your error also affects Debian *stable* then it will have to be fixed
  in Debian directly and not in Tails.

- If your error affects Debian *stable* but not Debian *testing* then it
  might have been solved already in Debian.

Debian also distributes images (*Debian live*) that you can install on a
USB stick using the same installation procedure as for installing Tails.

Debian stable
-------------

Images for the stable version of Debian, on which Tails is based, are
available on:

<https://cdimage.debian.org/images/unofficial/non-free/images-including-firmware/current-live/amd64/iso-hybrid/>

Download the `gnome+nonfree.iso` image to have the GNOME desktop and
all the non-free firmware for better hardware compatibility.

Debian testing
--------------

Images for the testing version of Debian are available on:

<https://get.debian.org/cdimage/unofficial/non-free/cd-including-firmware/weekly-live-builds/amd64/iso-hybrid/>

Download the `gnome+nonfree.iso` image to have the GNOME desktop and
all the non-free firmware for better hardware compatibility.
