[[!meta title="Introduction to GNOME and the Tails desktop"]]

The desktop environment used in Tails is [GNOME](https://www.gnome.org).
This page describes some important features of the desktop in the context of
Tails.

[[!toc levels=3]]

<h1 id="top-navigation-bar">Top navigation bar</h1>

In the upper left corner of the screen there is one button and three menus:

  - the <b>Activities</b> button
  - the <span class="guimenu">Applications</span> menu
  - the <span class="guimenu">Places</span> menu

<h2 id="activities">Activities overview</h2>

To access your windows and applications you can either:

  - Click on the <b>Activities</b> button.
  - Throw your mouse pointer to the top-left hot corner.
  - Press the <b>Super</b> ([[!img lib/start.png class="symbolic" link="no" alt=""]]) key on your keyboard.

You can see your windows and applications in the overview. You can also
start typing to search your applications, files, and folders.

<h2 id="applications">Applications menu</h2>

The <span class="guimenu">Applications</span> menu provides shortcuts to the
[[included software|about/features]] and to GNOME configuration utilities.

[[!img applications.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<a id="help"></a>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/settings.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

    <p><b><i>Settings</i></b></p>

    <p>To change various system settings such as keyboard, mouse,
    touchpad, or displays, choose <b>System Tools&nbsp;▸ Settings</b>.</p>

    <div class="next">

    <p>By default, any setting that you change in Tails is lost when you shut
    down. Only the settings that you saved in the [[Persistent
    Storage|persistent_storage]] are restored when you restart Tails.</p>

    </div>

    <div class="tip">

    <p>To learn about the many keyboard shortcuts in GNOME, open the
    <i>Settings</i>. At the bottom of the <b>Keyboard</b> section, choose
    <b>View and Customize Shortcuts</b>.</p>

    </div>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/help-about.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>About Tails</i></b></p>

  <p>To know the version of Tails that you are currently running, choose
  <b>Tails</b>&nbsp;▸ <b>About Tails</b>.</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/help-browser.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Help</i></b></p>

  <p>To access the <b>GNOME Desktop Help</b>, choose
  <b>Utilities</b>&nbsp;▸ <b>Help</b>.</p>

  </div>

</div>

<h3 id="favorites">Favorites submenu</h3>

In the <span class="guisubmenu">Favorites</span> submenu, a few
shortcuts allow you to launch the most frequently used applications:

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/tor-browser.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tor Browser</i></b> allows you to browse the web anonymously
  and uncensored.</p>

  <p>See [[browsing the web with <i>Tor Browser</i>|anonymous_internet/Tor_Browser]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/tor-connection.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tor Connection</i></b> allows you to connect to the Tor
  network.</p>

  <p>See [[connecting to Tor|anonymous_internet/tor]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/persistent_storage.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Persistent Storage</i></b> allows you to save some of your
  files and configuration in an encrypted Persistent Storage on your Tails
  USB stick.</p>

  <p>See [[Persistent Storage|persistent_storage]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/help-browser.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tails Documentation</i></b> opens an offline version of the Tails
  website and documentation.</p>

  <p>See our [[documentation|doc]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/whisperback.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>WhisperBack Error Reporting</i></b> allows you to report
  problems to our team.</p>

  <p>See [[reporting an error|bug_reporting]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/tails-installer.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tails Cloner</i></b> allows you to clone your Tails to another
  USB stick and back up your Persistent Storage.</p>

  <p>See [[installing by cloning from another Tails on PC|install/clone]].</p>

</div>
</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/thunderbird.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Thunderbird</i></b> allows you to write emails and read RSS and
  Atom feeds.</p>

  <p>See [[emailing and reading news with
  <i>Thunderbird</i>|anonymous_internet/thunderbird]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/keepassxc.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>KeePassXC</i></b> allows you to store and manage secure
  passwords.</p>

  <p>See [[managing passwords with
  <i>KeePassXC</i>|encryption_and_privacy/manage_passwords]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/kleopatra.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Kleopatra</i></b> allows you to encrypt text and files using
  <i>GnuPG</i>.</p>

  <p>See [[encrypting text and files using <i>GnuPG</i> and
  <i>Kleopatra</i>|encryption_and_privacy/kleopatra]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<h2 id="places">Places menu</h2>

The <span class="guimenu">Places</span> menu provides direct access to different
folders and storage media.

[[!img places.png link="no" alt=""]]

<h2 id="tor-status">Tor status and circuits</h2>

The Tor status icon ([[!img lib/symbolic/tor-disconnected.png alt="Tor status menu" link="no" class="symbolic"]] or [[!img lib/symbolic/tor-connected.png alt="Tor status menu" link="no" class="symbolic"]]) provides a shortcut to *Onion
Circuits*, which allows you to manage the Tor circuits being used by Tails.

[[!img tor-status.png link="no" alt=""]]

[[See our documentation on *Onion Circuits*.|anonymous_internet/tor/circuits]]

<h2 id="accessibility">Universal access</h2>

The universal access menu allows you to activate the screen reader,
screen keyboard, large text display, and other accessibility technologies.

[[!img accessibility.png link="no" alt=""]]

[[See our documentation on accessibility.|accessibility]]

<h2 id="keyboard">Keyboard layouts</h2>

The keyboard layout menu allow you to change the keyboard layout and
input method for non-Latin scripts.

[[!img keyboard.png link="no" alt=""]]

<h2 id="system">System menu</h2>

In the top-right corner of the top navigation bar, the system menu allows you to
manage your settings, connect to a Wi-Fi network, and restart your computer.

[[!img system-with-wired.png link="no" class="screenshot" alt=""]]

<h3 id="networking">Networking</h3>

From the system menu, you can choose which Wi-Fi network to connect to.

See also the documentation on [[connecting to a network|anonymous_internet/networkmanager]].

<h3 id="screen-locker">Screen locker</h3>

Click on **Lock screen** to lock your screen with a password.

- If you set up an [[administration password|first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]]
  when starting Tails, you can unlock your screen with your administration
  password.

  <div class="tip">
  <p>Your screen will automatically lock after some time if you have set up an
  administration password. To disable this behavior, execute the following
  command in a terminal:</p>

  <p class="pre command">gsettings set org.gnome.desktop.screensaver lock-enabled false</p>

  </div>

- Otherwise, you can set up a password to unlock your screen when locking your
  screen for the first time.

  [[!img screen-locker.png link="no" alt=""]]

<h3 id="suspend">Suspend</h3>

Click **Suspend** to suspend your computer.

While suspended, your computer is not computing anymore but is still powered on,
like if it was standing still but still alive.

To resume from suspend and go back to the Tails desktop, push the power button
of your computer.

<div class="caution">

<p>If you remove your Tails USB stick while suspended, your computer will not
shut down immediately and will only shut down when resuming.</p>

<p>An attacker with physical access to your computer and capable of finding
your screen locker password or setting up a [[cold boot
attack|doc/advanced_topics/cold_boot_attacks]] can compromise your Tails while
suspended.</p>

<p>For more security, [[shut down Tails|doc/first_steps/shutdown]] entirely.</p>

</div>

<h1 id="shortcuts">Desktop shortcuts</h1>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/help-browser.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Tails documentation</i></b> opens an offline version of the Tails
  website and documentation.</p>

  <p>See our [[documentation|doc]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img lib/apps/whisperback.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Report an Error</i></b> allows you to report problems about Tails to
  our team.</p>

  <p>See [[reporting an error|bug_reporting]].</p>

  </div>

</div>

<div class="icon">

  [[!img user-trash.png link="no" alt=""]]

  <div class="text">

  <p><b><i>Trash</i></b> is where the deleted files are moved.</p>

  </div>

</div>

<!-- XXX: Opting to use #files instead of #nautilus because #files is linked
          to from wiki/src/doc/advanced_topics/internal_hard_disk.mdwn
-->
<h1 id="files">The <span class="application">Files</span> browser</h1>

To open the <span class="application">Files</span> browser, you can
either:

- Choose <span class="menuchoice">
    <span class="guimenu">Applications</span>&nbsp;▸
    <span class="guisubmenu">Accessories</span>&nbsp;▸
    <span class="guimenuitem">Files</span></span>.

- Open one of the shortcuts from the <span class="guimenu">Places</span>
  menu.

[[!img lib/apps/files.png link="no" alt=""]]

To connect to a remote SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol) server:

1. Choose <span class="guilabel">Other Locations</span> in the sidebar
   of the <span class="application">Files</span> browser.

1. Specify an SFTP server in <span class="guilabel">Connect to
   Server</span> at the bottom of the right pane. For example:

   <p class="pre command">ssh://user@example.com/</p>

1. Click <span class="bold">Connect</span>.
