[[!meta title="Documentation style guide"]]

Introduction
============

We use this style guide to keep our documentation clear, consistent, and
accessible to a global audience. Apply this style guide when writing new
documentation or when updating existing documentation.

Reference hierarchy
===================

Use references in the following order:

1. This style guide.

2. The [GNOME Documentation Style Guide](https://developer-old.gnome.org/gdp-style-guide/).

   Read at least [Section 1 ― Fundamental Concepts of Technical
   Documentation](http://developer-old.gnome.org/gdp-style-guide/2.32/gdp-style-guide.html#fundamentals).

   The following sections are also of particular interest or have been
   debated within Tails before:

     - [4.&nbsp;Writing documentation for an International
       Audience](http://developer-old.gnome.org/gdp-style-guide/2.32/gdp-style-guide.html#locale)
       includes specific rules about how to write documentation that is
       easier to translate, with practical examples.

     - [5.2.&nbsp;Checks You Can Do
       Yourself](http://developer-old.gnome.org/gdp-style-guide/2.32/gdp-style-guide.html#improving-6)
       lists the top ten topics that you need to watch out for when you
       review your work.

     - [A.&nbsp;Recommended
       Terminology](http://developer-old.gnome.org/gdp-style-guide/2.32/gdp-style-guide.html#wordlist)
       contains a glossary of terms for use when writing documentation.

3. Other style guides:

   - [Google developer documentation style guide](https://developers.google.com/style)

   - [Microsoft Writing Style Guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/welcome/).

   - [Apple Style Guide](https://help.apple.com/applestyleguide/)

We use US spelling. For spelling of words, we use the
[Merriam-Webster](https://www.merriam-webster.com/) dictionary.

The following resources can also be helpful when writing documentation for
Tails:

Related online resources
------------------------

- Jakob Nielsen's
  [How Users Read on the Web](http://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-users-read-on-the-web/)
  and [Be Succinct - Writing for the Web](http://www.nngroup.com/articles/be-succinct-writing-for-the-web/).
  However do not use bold for scanning in instruction steps. Steps
  should be short enough and bold mixes up with other GUI formatting.

- [Wikipedia.org](https://en.wikipedia.org/),
  [Webopedia.com](http://www.webopedia.com),
  [Whatis.com](http://whatis.com) can be used as terminology websites
  for technical terms.

Style and usage
===============

<a id="administration-password"></a>

- **administration password** vs **root password**

  Use *administration password*. Avoid *root password* even though many
  Linux users would use it.

  *For example:*

  - [[Set up an administration password
    |doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]] when
    you start Tails.

  - Start Tails and [[set up an administration
    password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

<a id="alt"></a>

- **`alt` attributes for images**

  The `alt` attribute of an image is, for example, read by screen readers
  in place of images allowing the *content* and *function* of the image to
  be accessible to those with visual or certain cognitive disabilities.

  Every image must have an `alt` attribute but it can be empty (`alt=""`).

  In the case of our documentation:

  - Often screenshots require no additional information to clarify their
    *content*. They often provide visual context that is useful for people
    who see them but not necessary to people who don't see them.

  - For graphical buttons or icons, use as `alt` attribute the text that
    is read by the GNOME Screen Reader (or that you think should be read
    if none is read). For example:

        1. Click on the <span class="guimenu">
        \[[!img lib/unlock.png alt="Unlock" class="symbolic" link="no"]]
        </span> button.

  For more guidelines and examples about writing good `alt` attributes,
  read the article on [alternative text by
  WebAIM](https://webaim.org/techniques/alttext/).

<a id="anchor"></a>

- **anchor** (HTML anchor)

  Use HTML anchors to provide shortcuts when pointing people to sections
  inside a page.

  Keep them as short as possible as they appear in the URL.

  Use lowercase and underscore to separate words.

  *For example*:

  - `<a id="2014">` in `doc/about/finances` to be able to point to
    `https://tails.net/finances#2014`.

  When adding an anchor to a section on a page that has a table of
  content, add the `id` attribute directly to
  the HTML heading. ikiwiki automatically references this anchor in the table
  of content instead of the default value that might change over time.

  *For example:*

  - <pre>
    \[[!toc]]
    &lt;h1 id="my_section"&gt;My section&lt;/h1&gt;
    </pre>

    Creates a hyperlink to `#my_section` in the
    table of content instead of a hyperlink to
    `#index1h1` that might change with the
    structure of the page.

  To reduce translation work, avoid adding anchors to translated pages when we
  are not using them anywhere on the website.

<a id="boot"></a>

- **boot** vs **start**

  Use *start* and *restart* as much as possible to refer to starting a
  computer on Tails; *boot* is almost always unnecessary jargon.

  You might use *boot* when the word is displayed to the user by the
  computer or when writing for a technical audience, like in our
  design documentation.

  Use *boot* when referring to *boot options*, which are only
  documented for workarounds or a technical audience.

  *For example*:

  - When starting Tails, add the `toram`
    boot option. See our instructions on [[modifying the boot options using
    the Boot Loader|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]].

  - To make the display work properly, [[add the following boot option using the
    Boot Loader|doc/advanced_topics/boot_options]] when starting Tails:

        nouveau.noaccel=1

<a id="boot-menu"></a>

- **Boot Menu** and **Boot Loader**

  Use *Boot Loader* when referring to either *GRUB* or *SYSLINUX*.

  *For example:*

  - The Boot Loader is the first screen that appears when starting Tails.

  Use *Boot Menu* and *Boot Menu key* when referring to the BIOS
  screen that allows choosing from which device to start from.

  [[!img install/inc/screenshots/boot_menu.png link="no" alt=""]]

<a id="bulleted-lists"></a>

- **bulleted lists**

  Refer to this article from NN/g on [presenting bulleted
  lists](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/presenting-bulleted-lists/).

  Always add empty lines between list items to:

  - Make them easier to read.

  - Make them easier to translate. Each item from the list will be put
    in a separate PO string in PO files by the PO plugin when building
    the website.

<a id="capitalization"></a>

- **capitalization**

   * **Use sentence case for titles and headings**

     Do not capitalize the second or subsequent words,
     unless they are proper nouns. Sentence case
     looks less formal and is easier to read for a global audience.

     See the [capitalization rules from Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Naming_conventions_%28capitalization%29).

   * **Use title case for GUI items**

     Buttons, dialogs, applications, menus, etc.

<a id="code"></a>

- **Code excerpts and error messages**

  To write an entire paragraph as code that cannot wrap and stop interpreting
  HTML within it, use either:

  - 4 spaces as indentation, like in Markdown

  - `<pre>`

  To write an entire paragraph as code that can wrap and keep interpreting HTML
  within it, use:

  - `<p class="code">`

  To write only some words as code and stop interpreting HTML within them, use
  either:

  - Backticks (<span class="code">\`</span>), like in Markdown

  - `<code>`

  To write only some words as code and keep interpreting HTML within them, use:

  - `<span class="code">`

- **Command lines**

  To write a command line as an entire paragraph that can be selected and
  copied, use:

  - `<p class="command">`

    Such a command line cannot wrap to make it clear to the reader that it has
    to be executed as a single command line.

  To write a command line *template* as an entire paragraph that cannot be
  selected and copied, use:

  - `<p class="command-template">`

    Such a command line cannot be selected to prevent the reader from executing
    it as such.

  Within a command line template, delimit the placeholders that have to be
  replaced by the reader with:

  - `<span class="command-placeholder">`

  To write a command line that has to be executed as root, use:

  - `<p class="command-root">`

  You can combine these different classes.

  Explain how to replace the placeholders before giving out the full comman line.

  *For example:*

  - Markdown:

        Execute the following commands to install a new package. Replace
        <span class="command-placeholder">package</span> with the package that
        you want to install.

        <p class="command-template command-root">
        apt install <span class="command-placeholder">package</span>
        </p>

  - Result:

    Execute the following commands to install a new package. Replace
    <span class="command-placeholder">package</span> with the package that
    you want to install.

    <p class="command-template command-root">
    apt install <span class="command-placeholder">package</span>
    </p>

<a id="css"></a>

- **CSS formatting for documentation**

  Use the following Markdown and HTML
  to style your documentation using CSS.

  - Features

    Capitalize the name of major features of Tails.

    *For example:*

    * Welcome Screen

    * Persistent Storage

  - Application and file names

    Write in italic the names of files and applications other than Tails.

    *For example:*

    * Markdown: `*Thunderbird*`

    * HTML: `<i>Thunderbird</i>`

    * Result: *Thunderbird*

    *For example:*

    * Markdown: `*~/.gnupg/gpg.conf*`

    * HTML: `<i>~/.gnupg/gpg.conf</i>`

    * Result: *~/.gnupg/gpg.conf*

  - Button names, GUI labels, key caps, and menu items

    Write in bold button names, GUI labels, key caps, and menu items, especially
    in procedures.

    *For example:*

    * Markdown: `Click **Save**.`

    * HTML: `Click <b>Save</b>.`

    * Result: Click **Save**.

    In documentation, do not a not add the elipsis of the button label to
    indicate that a dialog box will appear.

    *For example:*

    * Markdown: `Choose **Applications&nbsp;▸ Tor Browser**`

    * HTML: `Choose <b>Applications&nbsp;▸ Tor Browser</b>`

    * Result: Choose **Applications&nbsp;▸ Tor Browser**

<a id="debian-versions"></a>

- **Debian and Ubuntu versions**

  Refer to Debian and Ubuntu versions primarily by their number, and additionally
  by their codenames.

  *For example*:

  - Tails 3.0 is based on Debian 9 (Stretch)

  - *Tails Installer* is available on Ubuntu 15.10 (Wily Werewolf) or later.

<a id="earlier"></a>

- **earlier** and **later**

  Use to refer to versions of software.

  Don't use *lower* and *higher* or *newer* and *older*.

  Don't use "regular expressions" like *Tails 2.1.&#42;*.

  *For example:*

  - If you are running macOS 10.10 (Yosemite) or earlier

<a id="future-tense"></a>

- **future tense**

  Whenever possible, use present, not future, tense. Don't switch
  unnecessarily from present to future tense when present tense is
  sufficient to express a sequence of steps or events.

  Present tense is easier to read than past or future tense. Simple verbs
  are easier to read and understand than complex verbs, such as verbs in
  the progressive or perfect tense.

<a id="digit-grouping"></a>

- **digit grouping**

  Use a non-breaking thin space (HTML entity: `&#8239;`) or a space to separate
  groups of three digits.

  *For example*:

  - $50&#8239;000

  See [[!wikipedia Decimal_separator#Digit_grouping]] and [[!wikipedia
  ISO_31-0#Numbers]].

<a id="gnome-application"></a>

- **GNOME applications: *Files*, *Disks*, etc.**

  GNOME applications that have a common noun as their name (like
  *Files* or *Disks*) can be confusing when referred
  to in the documentation.

  Make sure to clarify that you are referring to an application (and
  not, for example, a set of files or disks):

  *For example*:

  - In the title of sections

  - When first referring to the application in a section

  *Use*:

  - The *Files* browser

  - The *Disks* utility

  Otherwise, use the short name of the application as it appears in the menus when giving
  instructions to be executed inside Tails.

  *For example*:

  - Open */live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/dotfiles* in *Files*.

  Prepend "*GNOME*" when giving instructions to be executed outside of
  Tails.

  *For example*:

  - Install *GNOME Disks* in Debian.

<a id="graphics-card"></a>

- **graphics card**

  And not *graphics adapters*, *graphics*, *graphical hardware*, or
  *video card*.

<a id="compress-image"></a>

- **Image compression**

  - Images on our website are compressed and cleaned using the
    [[compress-image.sh]] script. To run this script you need the
    `zopfli` and `mat2` packages.

<a id="internet"></a>

- **Internet**

  Capitalize. When used as a noun, always preceded by *the*.

<a id="shortcuts"></a>

- **Ikiwiki shortcuts**

  The `\[[!tails_ticket ..]]` and `\[[!wikipedia ..]]` strings you can find in some files are ikiwiki [[shortcuts]].
  You might also need to understand [[ikiwiki directives|ikiwiki/directive]].

<a id="link"></a>

- **Link labels**

  Write link labels that are both specific and short to help with the
  findability and accessibility of content.

  Links must be able to stand alone as people scan rather than read on the web.

  See [NN/g: Better Link Labels: 4Ss for Encouraging Clicks](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/better-link-labels/).

<a id="mac-address"></a>

- **MAC address anonymization**

  And not *MAC address spoofing*, or *MAC spoofing*.

  We're still using *MAC spoofing* in internal and design documentation because
  it's common tech jargon.

<a id="media"></a>

- **media** and **installation media**

  Use only in rare occasions where it is especially relevant to mention
  both USB sticks and DVDs.

  Tails is now primarily advertised for USB sticks. We prefer making our
  text easy to read for the majority of people using USB sticks than to
  be exhaustive and always mention DVDs, implicitly or explicitly.

  *For example*:

  - Tails runs on a USB stick that you can plug in and use on almost
    any computer.

  - It is not possible to install Tails on a hard disk. Tails is
    designed to be a live system running from a removable media: USB
    stick or DVD.

<a id="might"></a>

- **might**, **may**, **can**

  Use *might* to express possibility.

  Only use *may* to express permission.

  Use *can* to express ability.

  Only use *could* to refer to the past.

  See [Microsoft Style Guide: can, may](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/c/can-may).

<a id="network-interface"></a>

- **network interface**, **Wi-Fi interface**

  And not *card*, *device*, or *adapter*.

  Still, **USB Wi-Fi adapters** are USB dongles that provide a Wi-Fi interface.

<a id="numbers"></a>

- **numbers**

  Show numbers as numerals, and not letters.

  See [NN/g: Show Numbers as Numerals When Writing for Online Readers](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/web-writing-show-numbers-as-numerals/).

<a id="persistent-storage"></a>

- **Persistent Storage**

  And not *persistence* or *persistent volume*. Capitalize. Can be
  introduced by *your*, *the*, *a* or no article depending on the
  context.

  The Persistent Storage refers to both the feature and the encrypted
  volume on the USB stick.

  In rare occasions, we write *encrypted Persistent Storage*, for
  example when introducing the concept. Otherwise, we rely on the
  interface of the Welcome Screen to remind people that it is encrypted.

  The Persistent Storage is *created* using the Persistent Storage settings and
  *unlocked* in the Welcome Screen.

  *For example*:

  - Create a Persistent Storage on your Tails USB stick.

  - Enter your passphrase to unlock your Persistent Storage.

  - Everything in the Persistent Storage is encrypted automatically.

  - Add To Persistent Storage (button)

<a id="persistent-folder"></a>

- ***Persistent* folder**

  The folder */home/amnesia/Persistent/*.

  *For example*:

  - Save the database as `keepassx.kdbx` in the *Persistent* folder.

<a id="persistence-feature"></a>

- **feature of the Persistent Storage**

  And not *Persistent Storage feature*.

  To refer to the features available in the configuration of the
  *Persistent Storage*.

  The construction *of the Persistent Storage* can be omitted if
  redundant in the context.

  *For example*:

  - To install additional software automatically when starting Tails, turn on
    the [[Additional Software|doc/persistent_storage/configure#additional_software]]
    feature of the Persistent Storage.

<a id="persistent"></a>

- **persistent** and **persist**

  The property of something saved in the Persistent Storage and the act
  of making something persistent. Use rarely.

  *For example*:

  - The Persistent Storage is optional and you always decide what is
    persistent. Everything else is amnesic.

<a id="please"></a>

- **please**

  Avoid please except in situations where the user is asked to do
  something inconvenient or the software is to blame for the situation.

<a id="procedures"></a>

- **procedures** (a series of steps)

  Keep the number of steps low within a procedure (for example, below
  10, ideally 7). For longer procedures, split them and give each
  section a title.

  Add a blank line between each step.

  Rely on the automatic numbered of Markdown and number all the steps
  with `1.`

  See also the *Microsoft Manual of Style: Procedures and technical
  content*.

  *For example*:

      1. Make sure that you are connected to the Internet.

      1. Start *Software Sources*.

      1. Click on the **PPAs** button and then choose to **Add a new PPA...**.

<a id="qr"></a>

- **QR codes**

  - To encode and decode QR codes, you can use the [[qrcode-encode.sh]]
    and [[qrcode-decode.sh]] scripts. To run these scripts
    you need to install the `qrencode` and `zbar-tools` packages.

    For example (run from Tails' source root):

        wiki/src/contribute/how/documentation/qrcode-encode.sh https://tails.net/

    Creates a QR code in tails_net.png. And:

        wiki/src/contribute/how/documentation/qrcode-decode.sh tails_net.png

    Outputs:

        QR-Code:https://tails.net/

<a id="right-click"></a>

- **right-click**

  Trackpads on Mac have a single button. Control-click, the usual way of
  doing right-click on Mac, does something different in Tails (and
  Windows): it is used to select multiple items.

  Always clarify how to do right-click on Mac:

  *For example:*

  - Right-click (on Mac, click with two fingers) on the file and
    choose **Share via OnionShare**.

<a id="screenshot"></a>

- **Screenshots**

  Use screenshots only when they provide useful additional information to
  complete the text. The text should be enough to follow our documentation but
  screenshots might help provide context, engage the reader, or support a
  complex procedure.

  We limit the number of screenshots to the minimum
  because they take time to produce, they need frequent update, are harder to
  translate, and are not accessible.

  When using screenshots of full windows, we include the window decoration
  and a border of blue background to clarify the context and the nature of
  the image. To take such a screenshot:

  1. In *Gimp* choose **File**&nbsp;▸ **Create**&nbsp;▸ **Screenshot...**.

  2. Select **Include windows decoration**.

  3. Make sure the blue border (`0x204a87`) on each side of the screenshot is at least 18px.

  We also most of the time resize the screenshots to 66%, either when they are
  too big or when they can be confused for the actual application (see
  [[!tails_ticket 11527]]). Use the *NoHalo* interpolation in *GIMP*.

  We always compress screenshots using [[compress-image|style_guide#compress-image]].

  Good:

  [[!img screenshot-blue.png link="no"]]

  Bad:

  [[!img screenshot-transparent.png link="no"]]

  [[!img screenshot-cut.png link="no"]]

  When an element of a screenshot needs to be highlighted, for example
  because the element is small, has no label or is in a place that is hard
  to describe, highlight it in red using *Inkscape*:

  1. Create the base screenshot, resized at 66%.

  1. Open it in Inkspace.

  1. Create a red circle or rectangle with a width of 2 px.

  1. Export the screenshot to PNG, respecting its original size.

<a id="secure-boot"></a>

- **Secure Boot**

  Capitalize as a brand or feature. Writing *secure boot* would make it
  sound more like a magic security feature (which it is not).

<a id="serial-comma"></a>

- **serial comma**

  Place a [[!wikipedia serial comma]] immediately before the
  coordinating conjunction (usually *and* or *or*) in a series of three
  or more terms.

<a id="svg"></a>

- **SVG images**

  SVG are easier to maintain and look great on all screen size, but they are
  not displayed in the *Safest* security level of *Tor Browser*.
  ([[!tails_ticket 17805]])

  Because of that, avoid using SVG images:

  - Export SVG images to PNG and [[compress them|style_guide#compress-image]].

  - Store the SVG source side-by-side with its PNG version, to ease future
    modifications.

<a id="tails"></a>

- **your Tails**

  Use to refer to the installation of the operating system of the user.

  Use *your Tails USB stick* when it's useful to refer to the physical medium more explicitly.

  *For example*:

  - A virus in Windows could corrupt your Tails.

  - Plug your Tails USB stick into your computer.

<a id="session"></a>

- **Tails session**

  The time between starting Tails and shutting it down.

<a id="tails-versions"></a>

- **Tails versions**

  Refer to Tails versions by their number. Optionally mention the month
  and year of the release when it might help users evaluate the
  relevance of an information, for example when mentioning important
  changes in a past version.

  *For example*:

  - Tails 1.1 does not start in some virtualization environments.

  - Tails does not work on 32-bit computers since Tails 3.0 (June 2017).

<a id="tips"></a>

- **Tips, notes, cautions, bugs, and next**

  Use tips, notes, and cautions to highlight important information.

  * Tip:

        <div class="tip">

        <p>This tip could be useful to some readers.</p>

        </div>

    <div class="tip">

    <p>This tip could be useful to some readers.</p>

    </div>

  * Note:

        <div class="note">

        <p>This note attracts attention.</p>

        </div>

    <div class="note">

    <p>This note attracts attention.</p>

    </div>

  * Caution:

        <div class="caution">

        <p>This warning describes something dangerous.</p>

        </div>

    <div class="caution">

    <p>This warning describes something dangerous.</p>

    </div>

  * Bug:

        <div class="bug">

        <p>This bug describes an important flaw of the software.</p>

        </div>

    <div class="bug">

    <p>This bug describes an important flaw of the software.</p>

    </div>

  * Next:

        <div class="next">

        <p>This note helps to know what to read next.</p>

        </div>

    <div class="next">

    <p>This note helps to know what to read next.</p>

    </div>

  * Trophy:

        <div class="trophy">

        <p>This trophy celebrates a user achievement.</p>

        </div>

    <div class="trophy">

    <p>This trophy celebrates a user achievement.</p>

    </div>

  * Attack:

        <div class="attack">

        <p>This note decribes a security attack and its likelihood.</p>

        </div>

    <div class="attack">

    <p>This note decribes a security attack and its likelihood.</p>

    </div>

<a id="update"></a>

- **update** vs **upgrade**

  Use **upgrade** to refer to the replacement of a previous version of
  Tails by another.

  *For example:*

  - If you know someone you trust who already did the upgrade, you can
    upgrade your Tails by cloning from their Tails.

  You might use **update** to refer to other operations that update
  some data or software outside of Tails releases.

  *For example:*

  - Make sure to update your *dotfiles* each time you use the **init**
    command of *keyringer*.

  - The packages from your list of additional software will be updated
    automatically when you connect to the Internet.

<a id="usb-stick"></a>

- **USB stick**

  And not *USB drive*, *USB*, *thumb drive*, or *flash drive*.

<a id="vulnerability"></a>

- **vulnerability** or **security vulnerability**

  And not *hole*, *bug*, *issue*, or *exploit*.

<a id="welcome-screen"></a>

- **Welcome Screen**

  With an article. Not *Tails Greeter* or *the Greeter*.

<a id="wrap"></a>

- **Wrap to 80 characters but only when needed**

  New documentation should be wrapped to 80 characters. However, please do
  not submit patches that merely re-wrap existing text, as this makes it
  harder to read the Git history.
