[[!meta title="Mirror pools"]]

The Tails downloads are served using two different mirror pools
([[HTTP|mirrors#http-pool]] and [[DNS|mirrors#dns-pool]]), depending on the use
case.

[[!toc levels=2]]

<a id="http-pool"></a>

# HTTP pool

We publish a list of HTTP mirrors in [a JSON file on our
website](https://tails.net/mirrors.json), which is used by both the Tails
Upgrader (up to Tails 5.8), and the server-side redirector.

The server-side redirector is a web service that redirects clients to the
nearest mirror based on their IP geolocation data:

- The list of mirrors is automatically and periodically loaded from [the
  `mirrors.json` file on our website](https://tails.net/mirrors.json)

- For historic reasons, the `mirrors.json` configuration file is stored in a
  [[!tails_gitweb_repo mirror-pool desc="dedicated Git repository"]]
  that is added to our website with the ikiwiki underlay mechanism.

- IP geolocation data is automatically and periodically updated from [MaxMind's
  GeoLite2](https://dev.maxmind.com/geoip/geolite2-free-geolocation-data?lang=en)
  databases.

- Downloads are served under the `download.tails.net` domain (see [mirror
  statistics](https://download.tails.net/tails?mirrorstats)).

- [Mirrorbits](https://github.com/etix/mirrorbits) performs the actual
  redirections according to its own internal score system, which is based on
  mirrors' weights (imported from `mirrors.json`) and IP geolocation data
  (Autonomous Systems, countries and calculated distances).

- The server-side code can be found in [[!tails_gitlab
  tails/puppet-tails/-/blob/master/manifests/profile/mirrorbits.pp]]

The `mirrors.json` configuration file is essentially a list of mirrors, and for each
of them we need a few values:

 * `url_prefix`: whatever needs to be pre-pended to the path to an ISO
   (e.g. `/stable/tails-i386-2.0/tails-i386-2.0.iso`) that is shared
   between all mirrors, to form a complete URL to that ISO; for
   example `https://mirrors.wikimedia.org/tails/`

 * `rsync_url`: this URL is used by the server-side redirector to periodically
   check each mirror's health.

 * `weight`: the probability this mirror has to be picked by the
   dispatcher code, expressed as a non-negative integer; weight
   0 means that the mirror is currently disabled, and will never be
   redirected to

 * `email` (optional): the email address of the mirror's operator

 * `notes` (optional): various additional notes that can be useful to
   the managers of the mirror pool

For a more formal, and probably more up-to-date definition of the data
model, better see
[its JSON schema](https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/tails/mirror-pool/-/blob/master/schema.json).

<a id="dns-pool"></a>

# DNS pool

A DNS Round Robin pool (at `dl.amnesia.boum.org`) points to a few fast and
reliable mirrors. It is used as a fallback for the versions of *Tails Upgrader*
included up to Tails 5.8, inclusive. The DNS entries are managed by
[[Sysadmins|contribute/working_together/roles/sysadmins/services#mirror-pool]]
in the same way all the other DNS entries are managed.

# Documentation for mirror pool administrators

Documentation is maintained in the Sysadmins private documentation repository.
