[[!meta title="Verification of Tails reproducibility"]]

<div class="note">

After accepting to be the <i>Trusted Reproducer</i> you should have been
instructed to go here immediately and read the "Preparation"
section. For a planned release you should be doing this weeks before
the release you are about to reproduce; for emergency releases you
likely only have days or even hours. If you were not, file an
issue about this, since an important part of process must have been
missed by the RM.

</div>

[[!toc levels=3]]

<a id="preparation"></a>

# Preparation (when accepting to be the Trusted Reproducer)

Use whatever scheduling tool you prefer to make sure you will, on your
own initiative, return to this document and follow it within 72 hours
from the start of the manual testing session. In particular, do not
trust anything said by the RM about this process: we assume their
system may be compromised and could be used by an adversary to
mislead you.

# Gather input data

## Inputs from manual testers

A manual tester should have sent you
clear-signed hashes for all products of this release. Then:

1. Verify that the
   signature is valid and made by one of our usual manual testers
2. Put the hashes, excluding the OpenPGP signature data, into a file
   called `SHA512SUMS.txt`.

<!--     IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS="$(bin/iuk-source-versions "$VERSION")" -->
<!--     echo -e "Got these IUK source versions:\n${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS}" -->

## Your inputs

Set these environment variables accordingly:

* `ARTIFACTS`: the directory where build artifacts (e.g. the `.packages` file) land
* `DIST`: either 'alpha' (for RC:s) or 'stable' (for actual releases)
* `ISOS`: the directory where one stores `tails-amd64-*` sub-directories,
  like the ones downloaded with BitTorrent.
* `VERSION`: the version you're trying to reproduce
<!-- * `ISOS_CHECKOUT`: path to your Tails ISO history repo checkout. -->
<!-- * `PACKAGES_FILE="${ISOS:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.iso.packages"` -->
* `PUBLISHED_ARTIFACTS`: some _new_ directory where you can download
  gigabytes of data to.
* `SHA512SUMS`: the path of the `SHA512SUMS.txt` file from above.
* `TAILS_CHECKOUT`: path to your Tails Git repo checkout.


## Derived environment variables

    TAG="$(echo $VERSION | tr '~' '-')"

# Build your own products

## Build your own images

0. Ensure your [[build setup|contribute/build]] is up-to-date.

1. Fetch and verify the Git tag:

        cd "${TAILS_CHECKOUT:?}" && \
        git fetch origin --tags --force && \
        git tag -v "${TAG}"

   If the last output is a "Good signature" for the expected tag, made by
   Tails signing key, then we are good.
   Otherwise, if you see _anything_ else, we're _not_ good; immediately
   contact the RM and the Board! Proceeding with the rest of the steps
   are pointless in this case, so await instruction.

2. Build ISO and USB images:

    (
        set -eux
        cd "${TAILS_CHECKOUT:?}"
        git checkout "${TAG:?}"
        git submodule update --init
        SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH="$(date --utc --date="$(dpkg-parsechangelog --show-field=Date)" '+%s')"
        export SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
        rake build
    )

<!-- ## Build your own IUKs -->

<!-- 1. Obtain needed old Tails releases: -->

<!--         cd "${ISOS_CHECKOUT:?}" && \ -->
<!--         git annex sync && \ -->
<!--         for old_version in ${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS:?}; do -->
<!--             tails_dir="tails-amd64-${old_version}" && \ -->
<!--             git annex get "${tails_dir}" && \ -->
<!--             cp --dereference --recursive "${tails_dir}" "${ISOS:?}" -->
<!--         done -->

<!-- 2. Follow the [[Build the Incremental Upgrade -->
<!--    Kits|contribute/release_process#prepare-iuk]] instructions. Note that -->
<!--    the value of `SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH` set above is needed! -->

# Verification

If there is *any* type of mismatch at some point below, let the RM and
the Board know *immediately*! But still proceed and do everything below,
potentially reporting multiple different issues.

## Verify that your products match what was tested

You should have a mail in your inbox whose subject is "Re: Testing Tails ${VERSION}", sent by the RM to tails-manual-testers@boum.org

This email has, attached, OpenPGP signatures for the tested image. Save those files where you want, then run

    gpg --verify "/tmp/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.iso.sig" "${ARTIFACTS:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.iso"
    gpg --verify "/tmp/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.img.sig" "${ARTIFACTS:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.img"

Both of those must output `Good signature from "Tails developers <tails@boum.org>"`.


## Verify that your products match what was published

    To run this step, you need to wait for the release to be public.

### ISO and IMG

    This will get hashes of the published files from Tails mirrorbits server, so you can check the hash
without downloading the full image:

    (
        set -eu
        expectedSha="/run/user/$(id -u)/tr-sha256sums.txt"
        basefile="tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}"
        basepath="${DIST:?}/${basefile}/${basefile}"

        shaIso="$(curl -s --header "Accept: application/json" "https://download.tails.net/tails/${basepath}.iso" | jq --raw-output .FileInfo.Sha256)"
        shaImg="$(curl -s --header "Accept: application/json" "https://download.tails.net/tails/${basepath}.img" | jq --raw-output .FileInfo.Sha256)"
        (echo "${shaIso} ${basefile}.iso"; echo "${shaImg} ${basefile}.img") > "${expectedSha:?}"

        cd "${ARTIFACTS:?}"
        sha256sum -c "${expectedSha:?}"
    )


### IDF

If you are verifying the reproducibility of anything but a stable release
(for example, a beta or a RC), skip this part.

Download the IDF by running:

    wget https://tails.net/install/v2/Tails/amd64/${DIST:?}/latest.json -O latest.json

Then check that the hashes and sizes match what you have built:

    (
    set -eu
    which jq || sudo apt install jq
    for ext in iso img ; do
       locally_built_file="${ARTIFACTS:?}/tails-amd64-${VERSION:?}.$ext"
       idf_size=$(cat latest.json | jq ".installations[0].\"installation-paths\" | map(select(.type == \"$ext\"))[0].\"target-files\"[0].size")
       locally_built_size=$(stat --format='%s' "$locally_built_file")
       if [ "$idf_size" = "$locally_built_size" ]; then
          echo "OK: $ext size matches"
       else
          echo "FAIL: $ext size does not match"
       fi
       idf_sha256=$(cat latest.json | jq --raw-output ".installations[0].\"installation-paths\" | map(select(.type == \"$ext\"))[0].\"target-files\"[0].sha256")
       locally_built_sha256=$(sha256sum "$locally_built_file" | cut -f 1 -d ' ' | tr -d '\n')
       if [ "$idf_sha256" = "$locally_built_sha256" ]; then
          echo "OK: $ext sha256 matches"
       else
          echo "FAIL: $ext sha256 does not match"
       fi
    done
    )

<!-- ### UDFs -->

<!-- Examine each UDF by running: -->

<!--     for old_version in ${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS}; do -->
<!--         url=https://tails.net/upgrade/v2/Tails/${old_version}/amd64/${DIST:?}/upgrades.yml -->
<!--         ( -->
<!--             echo "Looking at '${url}':" -->
<!--             echo -->
<!--             curl --silent --show-error ${url} -->
<!--         ) | less -->
<!--     done -->

<!-- and checking that there are either two `target-files` entries: -->

<!-- * one of `type: full`, i.e. a full upgrade (so it refers to the ISO image) -->
<!--   and must have the same values as for the IDF (you were asked to save -->
<!--   the output above), so verify that it matches! -->

<!-- * one of `type: incremental`, i.e. an incremental upgrade (so it refers to a -->
<!--   IUK) and should match the output of: -->

<!--       for old_version in ${IUK_SOURCE_VERSIONS}; do -->
<!--       cat <<EOF -->
<!--       Expected values for https://tails.net/upgrade/v2/Tails/${old_version}/amd64/${DIST:?}/upgrades.yml: -->
      
<!--       sha256: $(sha256sum "${ISOS:?}/Tails_amd64_${old_version}_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk" | cut -f 1 -d ' ' | tr -d '\n') -->
<!--       size: $(du --bytes "${ISOS:?}/Tails_amd64_${old_version}_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk" | cut -f1) -->
<!--       url: https://download.tails.net/tails/${DIST:?}/iuk/Tails_amd64_${old_version}_to_${VERSION:?}.iuk -->
      
<!--       EOF -->
<!--       done -->
