[[!meta title="Checking the file system of the Persistent Storage"]]

In rare occasions, you might have to perform a file system check to repair a
broken Persistent Storage.

Unlock the Persistent Storage
=============================

1. When starting Tails, keep the Persistent Storage locked and [[set up an administration
   password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Choose **Applications**&nbsp;▸ **Utilities**&nbsp;▸ **Disks** to open the
   *Disks* utility.

1. In the left pane, click on the device corresponding to your Tails USB stick.

1. In the right pane, click on the partition labeled as
   <span class="guilabel">TailsData LUKS</span>.

1. Click on [[!img lib/network-wireless-encrypted.png alt="Unlock" class="symbolic" link="no"]]</span>
   to unlock the Persistent Storage. Enter the passphrase of the Persistent
   Storage and click **Unlock** again.

1. In the confirmation dialog, enter your administration password and click
   <span class="guilabel">Authenticate</span>.

1. Click on the <span class="guilabel">TailsData Ext4</span> partition that
   appears below the <span class="guilabel">TailsData LUKS</span>
   partition.

1. Identify the device name of your Persistent
   Storage. The device name appears below the list of volumes.
   It should look like `/dev/mapper/luks-xxxxxxxx`.

   Triple-click to select it and press **Ctrl+C** to
   copy it to the clipboard.

Check the file system using the terminal
========================================

1. Choose
    <span class="menuchoice">
      <span class="guimenu">Applications</span>&nbsp;▸
      <span class="guisubmenu">System Tools</span>&nbsp;▸
      <span class="guimenuitem">Root Terminal</span></span>
   and enter your administration password to open a root terminal.

1. In the terminal, execute the following command. Replace <span class="command-placeholder">device</span> with
   the device name found in step 8:

   <p class="command-template">fsck -y <span class="command-placeholder">device</span></p>

   To do so, you can type <code>fsck -y&nbsp;</code> and press
   **Shift+Ctrl+V** to paste the device name from the
   clipboard.

1. If the file system is free of errors, the last line from the output of
   `fsck` starts with `TailsData: clean`.

   If the file system has errors, `fsck` tries to
   fix them automatically. After it finishes, you can try executing the same
   command again to check if all errors are solved.
