[[!meta title="Managing the circuits of Tor"]]

<span class="application">Onion Circuits</span> displays information about
the current Tor circuits and connections.

To open **Onion Circuits**, click on the
Tor status icon ([[!img lib/symbolic/tor-disconnected.png alt="Tor status menu" link="no" class="symbolic"]]
or [[!img lib/symbolic/tor-connected.png alt="Tor status menu" link="no"
class="symbolic"]]) in the top-right corner and choose **Open Onion
Circuits**.

[[!toc]]

<h1 id="view">Understanding Tor circuits</h1>

If Tails is already [[connected to the Tor
network|doc/anonymous_internet/tor]], a list of Tor circuits appears in the
left pane of *Onion Circuits*.

<!-- Note for translators: the entry guard in use when you take the screenshot
onion-circuits.png is in a position to identify you. You might prefer to leave it
untranslated.-->

When you connect to a destination server, for example, when visiting a website,
the connection appears in the list below the circuit it uses.

Click on a circuit to display the technical details about each relay in the right pane.

[[!img onion-circuits.png link=no]]

Each Tor circuit is made of 3 Tor relays. In the example above, the connection
to **tails.net** goes through the 3 relays **drk**, **kicka**, and
**Quetzalcoatl**.

1. The first relay, here **drk**, is called the *entry guard*.

   If you configured a Tor bridge, your bridge is your entry guard.

2. The second relay, here **kicka**, is called the *middle relay*.

3. The third relay, here **Quetzalcoatl**, is called the *exit node*.

[[!img doc/anonymous_internet/tor/tor.svg link="no" alt="Schematics of a connection to Tor with the client, the 3 relays, and the destination server."]]

<h1 id="change">Closing and replacing a Tor circuit</h1>

You can close a given Tor circuit to help replace a particularly slow Tor
circuit or troubleshoot issues on the Tor network. To do so:

1. Right-click (on Mac, click with two fingers) on the circuit that you want to close.

1. Choose **Close this circuit** in the shortcut menu.

   When you close a circuit that is being used by an application, your
   application gets disconnected from this destination service.

   For example, when you close a circuit while <i>Tor Browser</i> is
   downloading a file, the download fails.

1. If you connect to the same destination server again, Tor uses a different
   circuit to replace the circuit that you closed.

   For example, if you download the same file again, Tor uses a new circuit.
