[[!meta date="Sat, 28 Oct 2023 10:00:00 +0000"]]
[[!pagetemplate template="news.tmpl"]]
[[!meta title="Make the gift of privacy!"]]
[[!tag announce]]

Since we started in 2008, hundreds of thousands of people around the world have
used Tails to be more secure, autonomous, and anonymous in their digital lives. 

We have come so far thanks to you, and need your support to continue to do what
we do best: deliver the world’s most privacy-preserving operating system! Your
donations are 70% of our income.

Our goal is clear: to make Tails even more useful for vulnerable people living
in high-risk environment. The proceeds from this fundraiser will drive
initiatives that enhance user experience, increasing accessibility and
usability, and fortifying the system against emerging threats.

# How you can contribute

With malicious actors’ intrusions into human rights growing in sophistication
and scale, Tails stands as a beacon of hope for those seeking refuge in a more
secure digital environment. We stand on the precipice of a future where digital
privacy should be a fundamental right, not a luxury. 

With your support, we will forge ahead, steadfast in our mission to fortify
Tails and make it accessible to all who seek refuge in its secure embrace. Here
are some 5 ways you can get involved:

1. By making a recurring donation. Recurring donations are the best insurance
for Tails’s mission. These help us weather economic uncertainties and plan our
work sustainbly.

2. With a one-time gift. If you can’t set-up a recurring donation, we’ll still
accept your one-time donations. Donate via PayPal, bank transfers, mail in your
checks, or just send us good, old cash. Here’s a pro-tip: donations of over USD
1,000 entitle you to some neat sponsorship benefits.

3. Through cryptocurrency: We accept crypto donations in Bitcoin, Ethereum, and
Monero.

4. Gift matching. If your employer runs gift-matching programmes, consider
looking up Riseup Labs and donate to Tails via Riseup Labs. Riseup Labs is our
fiscal sponsor in the United States of America.

5. Spread the word: And finally, please share this fundraiser with your
network, friends, and colleagues. Help us amplify our impact by reaching a
wider audience!

Every donation, no matter how small, makes a difference. Please donate today
and help us keep Tails alive and well in 2024 and beyond! 

Thank you for being part of this journey. Oh, and in case you have somehow
managed to skip over all the links to our donations page so far, here it is:
<https://tails.net/donate/>.
